- Mike Wozny is here and we're
gonna talk about bodybuilders
and what bodybuilders need to learn
that they haven't learned yet.
And a lot of things that
get published in research,
a lot of things that are
common knowledge with academia
don't end up always getting to the people
who are trying to make
results happen in the gym.
Gyms are not really incentivized
to give people results,
they typically just give people access
or selling personal training
and they don't really care what you do
and even if you're being ineffective
and that's too bad,
because there's certainly
more effective approaches
than people are doing now.
One of the things I regularly say is,
if regular weightlifting
and cardio for weight loss
works so well, where
are all the fit people?
- Right.
- Yeah, pretty much everybody
with impressive physique
has a supplement contract.
- Yeah.
- And it just shows you how rare that is,
it's really rare to be in great shape.
And a lot of people
should be in great shape,
millions of people
but they're going about doing it wrong.
So let's talk about Mike, your journey,
when you started moving away from weights.
- Moving away from weights,
I guess it really started
four years ago when I was
getting desperate 'cause
I hadn't competed at that
point in around four years
because of a knee injury that
kept egging me from squatting.
- Yeah.
- A quadricep tendon issue,
I had hurt it and every
time I would rehabilitate it
and working my way up again,
I eventually just would start swelling up
and there was nothing...
I felt absolutely defeated
and the funny thing is,
that's when Phil Hernan had met you
and I had this small interaction with you
and you talked about
balance and the bands.
And then I started paying
attention to the band thing,
'cause back when I was younger,
all bands were these
surgical tubing things
that we used to pump up-
- Yeah, bands used to be a joke.
Or they're great for rehab,
like an outward rotation movement
where you just outwardly rotate.
So just to rebuild your rotator cuff
from surgery or something.
- Yeah.
- Exactly.
And I had a lot of shoulder issues
from obviously bench pressing,
most guys that have shoulder issues,
it's from bench pressing.
- And they're not doing anything wrong,
that's just what bench pressing
does to your shoulders.
- Correct, yeah.
You get most load in the stretch position
and it eventually is gonna tear 'em up.
Started adding bands to my lifts
and I remember I was
training this one girl
and I had her doing lateral
raises with light dumbbells.
And then I would put this
band around her wrists
and her delts just started growing.
And they actually got remarkably
and we started adding
bands to bench press.
They started adding bands.
I started doing double
leg work on a balance
and that caused my hips
to engage properly.
I started using my
abductors, the adductors,
the glutes that, you know,
everything came in together and
it held everything in a place where
in order to balance perfectly,
I had to do a perfect squat.
You know, I couldn't put a load forward.
I didn't have my-
- Exercise on an unseeable surface,
and you're gonna fire everything.
- Yeah.
Everything was just equally tuned in
and my joints weren't
getting, there was no pain.
So then I started working
deeper and deeper and deeper.
And then I started adding
a band over my shoulders.
Well eventually what I
would start doing is,
going back to squatting, then
I would get set back again.
- Yeah, sure.
- I kind of had thought
competing was gonna be
the end of it all for me, it was done.
I was getting older, screw it,
and I was open to still training guys,
but I was working these long
hours in these weld shops
and I was training.
I was still going to the gym, but my legs,
I would just do what I could.
And it was always a depressing thing,
but it was well over a year ago now
I started doing single leg work
and just adding bands to it.
And all these guys are telling me,
oh, I've worked with those
bands, they don't do anything.
But they never really
just worked with bands
and kept doing it.
- They didn't really give a shot.
They threw a band on
something they were doing and-
- Yeah, they throw it on the weight.
You throw it on a weight and then,
people talk about how that
gets you between plateaus.
Well that's because the
muscles pushing harder
through the whole movement,
and it's gonna hyper trophy
more and it gets stronger.
It's not strengthening
the end of the movement,
it's strengthening the muscle
altogether, it's one muscle,
- Well, you fire more tissue
when you're in your stronger range.
- Yeah.
- I mean, it's not like-
- All these guys are talking about how
you're creating this kinetic energy.
It'll throw it at the end or
whatever you're strengthening
the end of your movement or whatever.
I'm like-
- True, and there's-
- In the muscle period, your maximum,
the amount you can go lift is going up
and so obviously knew Phil Hern very well.
- Yeah, one of my really good friends.
- He'd been one of my very good friends
for the last 12 years.
And I just trusted him completely.
He never steered me wrong.
And he had been doing the band pretty much
that's it for the last,
I'm gonna say three years.
- Yeah, that's how long
we were working on that.
- And he trained Cedric
McMillan with bands and,
Cedric was very impressed with it.
- Yeah.
I got some great pictures on the website
and Cedric using the X3.
- Okay, yeah, yeah.
- Now he graduated to the X3.
- Okay (laughs).
And then he had introduced
me just briefly to
another guy, you and I had
actually discussed earlier
and all these guys look great
and they're just using these bands
and I'm like, okay, well,
I'm gonna give it a try.
And I actually got a lot of backlash.
I couldn't believe the amount of people
that just thought I was completely stupid.
I had friends getting hold of me,
are you're not body building anymore?
I'm just wondering what
avenue you're going down.
And I said, well, I hurt so bad.
And I'm willing to try anything, you know?
- Right.
- If Phil believes that
even though he might
be crazy at the moment,
he's never steered me wrong,
and Phil's not stupid by any means.
- And as we found out,
Phil was never crazy.
And he's actually brilliant
because he can speak out
the right thing to do.
- And then so I'm doing the
single leg work, adding bands.
And then Phil finally said,
"Mike," it was about a year ago.
He said, "You're not
gonna know what bands do
"unless you just use them."
- Only.
- Yeah.
Just do 'em, I'm like, okay, screw it.
I started using just bands
and finding different ways.
And what he did was he said, "Mike,
"you're scientific, you like to dig in."
He said, "Try a bunch of
stuff and get back to me
"and see what you come up with."
Well, I'm doing all this crazy balancing
and putting bands on
everything and rigging 'em all
over the gym and trying
this and that and whatever.
And then I'm starting to
figure 'em out in my head,
and I'm thinking, okay,
so let's say a really
easy thing to remember,
I think it was a curl.
And it you'd start out with a weight,
like say a barbell curve.
And when you start out,
you's see you got 80 pounds
there with a barbell curl.
And as you come up, it's 80
pounds right out of the hole.
And then actually after
you pass halfway up,
because it's static,
resistance and gravity,
you start to lose, you know,
and then you have to bend-
- When you approach the
fully contracted position
the way it actually goes down
because the lever arm is
becoming closer to the origin.
- And the weird part is, in your head
you don't feel this weight in your hand.
So you kind of, at first it's weird.
But then I started noticing
less paying attention to the weight,
I started paying attention
to the way my muscle felt.
- That's right, 'cause you
don't have a weight to drop.
- Yeah.
- You start to focus on
the muscle (indistinct).
- You start, and it's
20 pounds of resistance.
And it's kind of funny feeling at first.
- Yeah.
- But as you come up,
it gets to the point where
it's dumb to a dead stop
and it is the hardest
contraction you've ever felt
in your entire life.
And guys would tell me, oh yeah,
you can get a real good pump with that,
but it ain't gonna build any muscle.
And I started thinking, well,
resistance is resistance.
- Muscle doesn't know
what you're contracting.
- My muscle doesn't have a fricking clue
what's going on there.
And not only that is it wasn't
limited to a linear plane and gravity
pulling it straight down.
This stuff could go all over the place.
So the stability of it was,
pretty soon your whole,
you're stabilizing to stay in it
and then your muscle is getting detached.
- And then the more
stabilization requiring
for growth hormone gets upregulated.
It all kind of dovetails together
all the principles
we've been talking about
when you go to fatigue
using a strong level
of variable resistance.
- Correct, yep.
And I started thinking about it
and every rep would get a little shorter,
you know what I mean?
I started thinking, well,
rep ranges don't matter as much anymore
because when you use a set
load, when you fail at the top,
you're definitely not gonna
get it out of the bottom.
It's done.
Then at that point, you'd
have to drop a weight
and then do a drop set.
- Right, and then that
discontinues the contraction,
blood starts rushing in
to recover the muscle.
And you really don't have the benefit,
you have no hypoxic benefit.
You're not gonna change
your myostatin levels.
I mean, basically your drop
set just like everything up.
- Yeah.
Even it does create a better pump.
And they've proven that
the pump lowers myostatin.
Obviously, 'cause it's hitting the ceiling
of that muscle, stretching it.
And it's like, well, we're
gonna have to expand.
But so let's say at the first
rep that you hit this wall
at 100 pounds and pretty
soon it's 99 pounds,
and it's 98.6 pounds and as you come up,
you recruit all these fibers,
you're recruiting fibers
into the contraction
rather than just out of the bottom, right?
So all these fibers,
they get contracted and
then they start failing
from the strongest.
And pretty soon you're
getting about halfway,
and the most static holds,
you're just holding the weight
that you can normally lift,
but you can pull against it.
It's like you're hitting a wall.
It's frustrating for a lot of people
'cause they don't understand the-
- It definitely feels different.
When developing the X3,
I definitely had the same,
it's funny 'cause I get by
the trolls that were like,
oh, weight lifting,
I like the way it feels or whatever.
And I'm like, ugh, I guess
results don't matter.
But I get it because when
I develop my prototype-
- It feels formal.
- Yeah, because you like seeing that
big amount of iron
moving around on a bench.
I remember the first time
I did 225 for repetitions,
it was like, wow.
I really liked seeing that
weight move, I felt cool.
I was like, that's something,
I'd never done that before.
And then when you're just
using banding exclusively,
I mean, those of you would
have trouble picturing this.
So if I've got banding hooked here
and then wrapped around my back,
let's say I go to 20
repetitions with 550 pounds
and then I can't get there anymore.
Well then, and this is
what Mike's talking about.
Then you start shortening
up the reference.
So you're dealing with less weight
because you're not
stretching the band as far.
So you're dealing with less weight here.
So now I'm doing
repetitions with 300 pounds,
and then I can't get there anymore.
And then I'm doing
repetitions with 200 pounds.
And then at the end I can only do this.
Like just maybe an inch of movement,
but you have fatigued
every range of motion
and every fiber within the muscle,
and that is something you
will never do with a weight.
It cannot happen.
So when I talk about
variable resistance and,
people get wrapped up and like,
well how much weight is that?
Like, okay, it's 550
because I just give people
a point of reference,
but that not the point, so not the point.
But they're kind of halfway right.
Because, and I'm gonna
reference two studies
and we'll put this in the show notes,
there's a Fry in 2010 and Linamo in 2005,
two different studies that showed
that the amount of testosterone activity
that you have in your
body has very little to do
with how much testosterone you have
cosing through your body.
It has to do with how many
receptor sites are open
and looking for that testosterone.
- The testosterone levels are irrelevant
if you don't activate the receptors.
- That's right.
That's right, yeah.
You can have all kinds
of testosterone system
even exogenously and it's not gonna do
what you think it's gonna do
unless you're putting the
heavy load on the body.
What we're talking about right
now is a superior strategy,
heavy, it's not heavy as in,
on a bar it's strategy
to get the most force
through the muscle and that's
gonna trigger the growth,
the most force and the
most fatigue is going to
trigger the maximum amount of growth.
So here's an interesting observation.
I've been a testosterone
replacement therapy patient
since I was 28, I had
some testicular damage,
and rugby, just a bad rugby hit.
And then what I noticed was
I had a prescription for
what seemed like a normal,
I didn't have any point of reference.
So it seemed like a normal dose.
And then as soon as I developed the X3,
I'd been taking TRT for years and years
and lifting for years and years.
So from basically 28 to 39,
I put on maybe a couple pounds of muscle.
The best thing that happened
with testosterone was
I felt a lot more calm.
I had like a little anxiety before that-
- Just the wellbeing.
- Yeah, just wellbeing.
The reason I first noticed
was I was having heart
palpitations and they were like,
oh, your cardiac muscle is really weak.
And I was like, what
are you talking about?
I run like 80 minutes,
just sprint, stop, sprint,
stop, in a rugby game.
Like my heart is dynamite.
And they're like, eh, no,
like your cardiac muscle
is underdeveloped.
So that's how I knew I
had to get a prescription
for a testosterone, and then when I did,
I saw almost no muscular benefit,
but then here's the weird thing.
So I started using variable
resistance at very high ratio,
variable resistance, which is what X3 is.
So as I was developing the X3,
I go in for additional blood work
and my physician would say,
your free testosterone is almost zero.
- You're using it.
- Right.
And I did not know about these
two studies at that moment.
And so I'm like, that's weird.
So he is like, well,
we're gonna up your dose
because I mean, I don't
know where it's going,
but disappearing.
And so he raised it up a
little bit and sure enough,
six months later he needed
to raise it up again,
and sure enough six months later...
I've never had to take any
sort of counter measure
from my TRT like a lot of guys,
they have to do an antiestrogen
or aromatase inhibitor
or something like that.
- Well, cause you're using it.
- Right.
'Cause the muscles using it and
I know the muscles using it.
And so like, I gave this interview
for this national geographic documentary.
And because what I had to say
was not controversial enough,
they cut it, which is just...
I'm actually giving some
useful information here.
The other shit in this
documentary, I don't know.
But it was really funny because it's like,
if people administer, if people who are,
let's say not TRT,
but using performance enhancing drugs,
if they proceeded with this logic,
I believe there could
be somebody who's like
a Mr. Olympia looking guy
who may actually not need
to take nearly the amount
of stuff that people do.
- Well, I completely agree.
- Because you're matching
the hormone with the use.
You actually have a way to track it.
It's free to (indistinct).
- What I have found John is,
testosterone doesn't cause
you to directly just get big.
There's a lot of guys that walk around
with a lot of body hair and a deep voice,
and they don't have a lot of muscle.
- Most, actually, most who
use testosterone exogenously.
- It's causing that constant
activation of the muscles.
And a lot of times with weights,
we stagnate so quick because
the tendon gets as strong as the muscle.
But when you're causing
damage to that tendon,
eventually it limits your progress.
And then you're not
getting that contraction
where it's that load increases all the way
to the very bitter end and it's
activating those receptors.
So same thing since,
obviously it was different body
building when I was younger,
took steroids.
And then I came off of them
when I was 29 years old.
And my natural levels
were 54 nanograms per mil.
- Absolutely.
- And the guy calls me,
Mike, that's like a woman.
I'm like, well, no wonder my girlfriend
thinks I'm cheating on her.
'Cause I wasn't sleeping with her.
You're really pretty but
that's about it, you know?
So obviously then I went on HRT
and for years I had taken
300 milligrams a week.
Recently I made a post telling
everybody I'm microdosing,
I'm taking 20 milligrams a
day of this testosterone,
six days a week.
So it comes to 120 milligrams a week,
and I'm holding all kinds of muscle.
- That's real smooth.
I like it, a lot.
- Obviously I'm a little
flat right now 'cause of,
not eating for three days, but
you can look the pictures up.
I've been documenting training.
What I've looked like through
this whole just using bands
and I'm getting away with
basically taking less
than most guys do HRT-wise
and seeing better results.
There's a lot of guys
that take so much shit,
they're like, oh, he's
probably full of shit.
I'm like, you try it.
Like try it.
- Most of what people take
is just completely wasted.
Doesn't go and do what
you think it's doing.
If your body doesn't
have the receptor for it,
it's not being used, you're not growing,
but you're just causing side effects
and all kinds of things.
- But what I've noticed is,
what the larger doses
of steroids seem to do
is the bro split everybody talks about.
If you're doing the once a week training,
all that stimulus and that
doing 12 fricking sets in a day
and not training it for a week,
then I guess because
you're taking so much shit,
you can recover from that
ridiculous amount of volume.
- Yeah.
- You don't shrink as fast because
your protein synthesis is up,
you don't have the protein breakdown,
you would naturally
and the cortisols down.
So you don't shrink by the
time you get to that next dose,
I should say, the next
time you work that muscle.
But if you know how to work
that muscle very efficiently,
multiple times a week, you're
stimulating it constantly.
You don't need to worry
about the atrophy effect
because you're hitting
it before it happens.
- Right.
- If that makes sense to you.
- Yeah, it makes absolute sense.
- Yeah, so these large
doses seem to help a guy
hold his size, but it's not necessary
if you changed your training
with the variable resistance,
the higher frequency, max stimulus,
least amount of damage.
The more times you can train a muscle,
stimulate it and recover and do it again,
the better off you're gonna be.
- We'll cover this in another show.
But one of the things that
Mike and I were talking about
over the past couple weeks was soreness
and tearing a muscle and muscle damage.
It's the opposite of what
a lot of people think.
A lot of people think you actually do
small tears in the muscle and
then it recovers and grows.
No small tears in the
muscle actually ensure
that you do not grow.
And it is only when you
do not create micro tears
that you do grow.
So they are inversely related.
The more damage you do, the muscle,
the less you're gonna grow.
And I would say the last it's really funny
between high school and the time I was 40,
I probably gained other
than puberty and shit,
just growing up,
I might have gained 10 pounds of muscle
in that huge period of time.
After turning 40, I've
gained 60 pounds of muscle,
which is not supposed to be a thing.
Like you turn 40 and
everybody's like, well-
- It's all downhill.
- You got all muscular or not.
And it's too late for you.
Yeah, that's not true.
- That's beautiful.
As you use the testosterone
and you can add more,
you're not gonna get side
effects, you're using it,
but you're gonna gain muscle.
- Yeah.
- It's the wave of the future here,
it is very exciting, it's very exciting.
- Yeah, it is exciting.
It's gonna be safer for everybody.
One of the problems with body
building that never makes it,
because the problems with
diuretics are much bigger.
One of the biggest
problems body building has,
is 300 pound people who are lean,
because 300 pounds of muscle
is putting a lot more stress
on the human heart than
being a 300 pound fat guy.
Because the 300 pound fat guy,
that extra body fat is not drawing blood.
It doesn't have a demand.
It's not vascular.
So form just-
- 800 horse engine with
a two barrel carburetor.
- Right.
Not a lot of people are gonna get that.
- Fuel pump.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I like car analogies,
but not everybody is a car guy.
I often say when
a lot of performance enhancing drug users
they'll be able to affect the muscle,
but they're not affecting
the tendons and ligaments
at the same rate.
'Cause we haven't figured out
how to anabolic ally enhance
tendons and ligaments from a biochemical
exogenous standpoint.
- Sure.
You see a lot of body growers
with extreme muscularity,
but it's like putting a formula
one engine in like a Prius.
You blow the wheels right off the car
as soon as you hit the
accelerator because-
- Strong enough to rip yourself apart.
- Yeah, yeah.
You don't have the tendons and ligaments,
that's another thing that
variable resistance does
when you're loading towards
the end, closer to lockout,
that will actually grow
tendons and ligaments.
But when you're lifting weight,
you're gonna pick a weight
that you can handle back here,
which will never really affect
the tendons and ligaments
because it's just not heavy enough.
- It's gonna cause micro
tears in the tendon,
and the tendons take a lot longer to heal-
- And you said it earlier,
and that builds scar tissue.
And then the scar tissue will
have you rip your tricep,
your pack.
And that's why seasoned
guys who bench press,
who've been doing heavy
bench press for a long time.
All of a sudden they rip
their pack doing something
that they've been doing for years.
They're not going for a
PR, they're just benching.
Why did I rip my pack?
Well, because every time you're benching,
you're creating cumulative damage.
So let's break that cycle,
let's have you use a high ratio
variable resistance, and
then you're gonna do great.
And you're not gonna have
any of the downsides.
- Yeah, I knew a guy that
did that once with his bicep.
You always curl a lot of weight
and he was putting a
radiator hose on a truck
and his bicep popped off
just trying to put a hose on the radiator.
It's like-
- Yeah, he was probably
just an awkward angle
not even really stressing his bicep.
Right, it's 'cause there's
scar tissue everywhere.
And I'm guessing that guy's
not lifting heavy now.
- No.
- Well he could use variable resistance
with great proficiency.
- Yeah.
I've got a lot of friends that,
lifted with me when we were kids
and they still like hobby wise,
they like to work out in
the garage or whatnot,
that have been following me.
And they've been ordering X3.
I got one guy that said
it's Wozni voodoo band magic.
His body doesn't hurt anymore.
His term makes me laugh 'cause he's like,
yeah, Wozni and his voodoo band magic.
He goes, Mike, I realize that-
- He could band, he's right.
It's like everybody that I tell
to start training this way,
or the X3 users, they're like,
I just can't understand
apparently really is the simple?
- It's silly.
- It's only challenging
because there's so much
that we were all taught.
And it's not that those things were wrong.
When I wrote this book,
when I wrote "Weightlifting
is a Waste of Time,"
this title is to get your attention.
- Correct.
- And if I had called it like, you know,
the variable resistance
method or something like that,
who would've bought that?
I sold a hundred thousand
copies of that book
pretty much instantly
because people were like,
oh, fuck this guy, I wanna read
this so I can discredit him.
And then they read it and they're like,
really gotta rethink my training.
- You've been the Charlie
Sheen of weightlifting
for a minute.
- Yeah, I kind did.
- And then when it started working,
then you weren't a bad guy anymore.
- No, no, no.
It's okay, the guys that
think I'm a bad guy,
it's the fact that I wrote the book
and everybody started talking about it.
I mean keep in mind,
it was difficult for me
to cross into fitness
because I was always in medical device.
Osteostrong was a
technology that I invented
and it's to treat bone density and boy,
people with bone density challenges
are typically postmenopausal women.
They're not really even online
talking about that much.
- Right.
- I really didn't have
much of an online presence.
So I really kinda had to
kick everybody in the nuts
to get their attention.
And that was really
what the book was about.
But there's 260 scientific references,
no, 250 scientific references, 260 pages.
Yeah, and it tells the whole story
of everything we're talking about.
But we're gonna wrap this
one up and we're gonna keep
doing these and really focus on
what bodybuilders need
to be more successful
and to have longer careers and
even treat body building
as like a longevity thing.
'Cause right now the
way people approach it,
it's a self-destructive thing.
And we want people to be
able to be fit and healthy
and happy, up until they're elderly.
That's the mission.
- No, (indistinct) can't
look amazing for being
65, 70 years old.
- Absolutely.
Right.
There's people there's anomalies
that have had that happen to them.
- Just pulled it off, yeah.
- Right, but we're gonna have it
so that everybody can be like that.
- Right, right.
- Yep, awesome Mike.
It s a good show.
We're gonna do it again real soon.
- Okay, thanks.